Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common newly diagnosed cancer and accounts for the second highest number of cancer related deaths in Australia, the third worldwide and of increasing importance in Asia. It arises through cumulative effects of inherited genetic predispositions and environmental factors. Genomic instability is an integral part in the transformation of normal colonic or rectal mucosa into carcinoma. Three molecular pathways have been identified: these are the chromosomal instability (CIN), the microsatellite instability (MSI), and the CpG Island Methylator Phenotype (CIMP) pathways. These pathways are not mutually exclusive, with some tumors exhibiting features of multiple pathways. Germline mutations are responsible for hereditary CRC syndromes (accounting for less than 5% of all CRC) while a stepwise accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations results in sporadic CRC. This review aims to discuss the genetic basis of hereditary CRC and the different pathways involved in the process of colorectal carcinogenesis.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major cause for morbidity and mortality globally. Worldwide, CRC is the fourth most common cancer in men and the third most common cancer in women.1 In the United States, approximately 142000 new diagnoses and 50000 deaths are reported annually from the disease.2The disease burden is similar in Australia, where CRC is the second most common newly diagnosed cancer, with over 14000 new cases reported each year and it accounts for the second highest number of cancer related deaths behind lung cancer.3Lifetime risk for developing CRC is 1 in 17 for men and 1 in 26 for women. CRC costs the Australian government $235 million a year in direct costs, accounting for 8.1% of total cancer cost.4
Relative CRC risk is defined by genetic predisposition and environmental factors, with age being the most important risk factor for sporadic CRC. The risk of developing CRC increases with age, and over 90% of sporadic CRCs occur in individuals over the age of 50.5Other risk factors include family history of CRC, a diet low in fibers and folate and high in fat and red meat, alcohol, cigarette smoking, sedentary occupation, obesity, and diabetes.6Approximately 5% of all CRC are due to inherited genetic mutations. Of the remaining 95% of cases, approximately 20% have a positive family history but cannot be categorized to any hereditary CRC syndrome.7 These are probably caused by genetic alterations secondary to an inherited predisposition, or common dietary and environmental factors. Advances in microarray technology allow genotyping of hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) with high accuracy. Using this technology, genome wide association studies (GWAS) aim to find susceptibility loci for CRC. In principle, GWAS compare the frequencies of genetic variants between affected individuals (cases) and unaffected individuals (controls) in a family based or case-control design.8,9Multiple susceptibility loci have been identified; however, their value in CRC risk prediction remains low.10The predictive value will likely improve with more variants being discovered.
Colorectal cancer evolves through a stepwise accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations, leading to the transformation of normal colonic mucosa into invasive cancer. Most CRC arise within pre-existing adenomas which harbor some of the genetic fingerprints of malignant lesions. This transformation is believed to take 10–15years, giving clinicians a window of opportunity to screen and subsequently remove these premalignant or early malignant lesions. The time to progression varies based on the polyp characteristics; high risk features for rapid malignant transformation include large size (≥1cm in diameter), multiple adenomas (≥3), adenomas with villous change, and adenomas with high grade dysplasia.11The recently described sessile serrated adenomas (SSA) demonstrate distinct molecular and pathological changes not commonly seen in traditional adenomas. These lesions are thought to progress to cancer via a different pathway—the serrated neoplasia pathway.12The optimum surveillance strategy for patients with SSA is yet to be determined and will require further investigation.
Identification of different molecular pathways of colorectal carcinogenesis has demonstrated the heterogeneous nature of CRC. The first model was proposed by Fearon and Vogelstein,13 in this model, there are three important features: first, colorectal neoplasia arises as a result of mutational activation of oncogenes coupled with mutational inactivation of tumor suppressor genes; second, mutations of at least 4 to 5 different genes are required for cancer to develop; and third, the accumulation of genetic alterations rather than their order is responsible for determining the biologic behavior of the tumor. The discovery of other CRC pathways beyond the Fearon and Vogelstein model13highlights the importance of understanding the molecular nature of CRC. In the past two decades, two important molecular discoveries have been made: first, the discovery of Microsatellite Instability (MSI) caused by defective Mismatch Repair (MMR) genes, an important feature in a subset of hereditary and in about 15% of sporadic CRC; and second, discovering the role of epigenetics, in particular hypermethylation, in silencing of gene function. Concordant methylation of the CG di-nucleotides in the promoter region of multiple genes is called CpG Island Methylator Phenotype (CIMP). Patients with CIMP tumors have distinct clinical and pathological characteristics. Classifying CRC based on the presence of MSI and CIMP was suggested by Jeremy Jass.14This classification describes five molecular subtypes, each with a different molecular profile and clinico-pathological features.
This review aims to provide a general overview of the different molecular pathways involved in colorectal carcinogenesis. Characterizing the genetic basis of the hereditary syndromes has led to a better understanding of the molecular biology of the more common sporadic CRC and will therefore be presented first.
Hereditary CRC syndromes result from germline mutations in genes involved in colorectal carcinogenesis. They account for less than 5% of all CRC cases.15Many syndromes are identified; the most common are Familial Adenomatous Polyposis and Lynch syndrome (also called Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Cancer [HNPCC]). Mutational analysis for at-risk patients and their families is available to identify the specific mutations, allowing appropriate surveillance and treatment. A brief review of hereditary CRC and their genetic basis will be discussed in this article. Management and screening strategies are beyond the purpose of this review and therefore will not be presented.
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) was the first recognized and best characterized colonic polyposis syndrome. It is a highly penetrant autosomal dominant disorder caused by germline mutations of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene.16–18FAP accounts for less than 1% of all CRC.19FAP serves as a model for the adenoma-carcinoma sequence described by Fearon and Vogelstein.13Clinically, patients with FAP present with hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomatous polyps, usually in the second decade of life. The life time risk of CRC approaches 100% and patients with FAP are also at risk of extra-colonic manifestations such as cutaneous lesions, osteomas, dental anomalies, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, desmoid tumors, and extra-colonic cancers (liver, pancreas, gastric and small bowel, periampullary, thyroid, and central nervous system).20
Attenuated FAP (AFAP) is a less aggressive form of the disease; it is characterized by delayed age of onset and fewer colorectal adenomatous polyps. Extra-colonic manifestations are less common in attenuated FAP.21
APCgene.Adenomatous Polyposis Coli gene is a tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome 5q21; it was first localized in 198716and cloned in 1991.17TheAPCgene has 15 exons and encodes a 310kDa protein with multiple functional domains. The location of the mutation within theAPCgene seems to correlate with disease severity and the presence of extra-colonic manifestation in FAP patients.22The majority of the mutations are frameshift or nonsense mutations that lead to premature truncation of protein synthesis.23,24APC protein is an important regulator of epithelial homeostasis. In particular, it regulates degradation of cytoplasmic β-catenin.25APC and β-catenin are components of the Wnt signaling pathway, a signal transduction pathway important for colorectal tumorigenesis. WhenAPCis mutated, cytoplasmic β-catenin accumulates and binds to the Tcf family of transcription factors (Fig.1), altering the expression of various genes affecting proliferation, differentiation, migration, and apoptosis. APC also plays a role in controlling cell cycle progression and stabilizing microtubules, thus promoting chromosomal stability.
MYH-Associated Polyposis.MYH-Associated Polyposis (MAP) is characterized by the presence of colorectal adenomatous polyps and an increased risk of CRC. It is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by bi-allelic mutations in theMYHgene.26TheMYHgene is located on chromosome 1p35 and is a base excision repair (BER) gene primarily targeting oxidative DNA damage.7The MAP carcinogenesis pathway appears to be distinct from CIN or MSI. It involves a high frequency of somatic APC mutations, a low frequency of loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and the tumors are usually microsatellite stable.27Clinically, patients with MAP have multiple adenomatous polyps, with varying numbers (ranging from 10 to more than 100). CRC develop in about 65% of patients, and usually presents at an older age than classic FAP.28One third of patients with MAP could have upper gastrointestinal lesions, but other extra-colonic manifestations are less common than classic FAP.28Phenotypically, MAP can be indistinguishable from FAP or attenuated FAP, and therefore genetic testing forMYHmutations should be performed in patients with suspected FAP or attenuated FAP and negative APC germline mutations.
Lynch syndrome, Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Cancer.Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Cancer is an autosomal dominant condition caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Loss of MMR activity leads to replication errors with an increased rate of mutations and a higher potential for malignancy. It is the most common hereditary CRC syndrome, accounting for 2–3% of all CRC cases.29The hallmark of HNPCC is the presence of microsatellite instability (MSI); this will be discussed in more detail later in the article. Patients with HNPCC develop CRC at a younger age than the general population, have a predilection for proximal colon cancers (70–85% of colon cancers are right sided), and are at a higher risk for synchronous CRCs.30,31Patients are at a higher risk of developing extra-colonic tumors including endometrial, ovarian, gastric, small bowel, pancreatic, hepatobiliary, skin, brain, and urethral tumors. The cumulative lifetime risk of an extra-colonic malignancy in females and males is 47% and 27%, respectively.32
Several guidelines are set out to help clinicians identify patients at risk of HNPCC. It is recommended that MSI testing be carried out on patients fulfilling these criteria and then be referred for further assessment by a cancer geneticist if MSI testing is positive.
Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Cancer is caused by a germline mutation in one of the MMR genes. These includeMLH1(MutL homolog 1)35located on chromosome 3p21,MSH2(MutS homolog 2)35located on chromosome 2p21-22,PMS2(post-meiotic segregation 2)36located on chromosome 7p22, andMSH6(MutS homolog 6)37located on chromosome 2p16. Bi-allelic inactivation of any of these MMR genes results in defective DNA repair and hence the accumulation of repetitive short nucleotide sequences called microsatellites. Mutations inMLH1orMSH2account for the majority of all mutations causing HNPCC.38Recently, germline deletions in theTACSTD1gene (a gene directly upstream ofMSH2), which encodes the epithelial cell adhesion molecule Ep-CAM, has been identified as the causative mutation in some families with HNPCC.39The risk of developing cancer in HNPCC patients and families differs depending on the gene mutation present. Families withMSH2mutations have more extra-colonic cancers thanMLH1mutation carriers. Families that harborMSH6mutations develop CRC at a more advanced age, and have a higher risk of developing endometrial cancers.
