As angiogenesis is essential for tumor growth and metastasis, controlling tumor-associated angiogenesis is a promising tactic in limiting cancer progression. The tumor microenvironment comprises numerous signaling molecules and pathways that influence the angiogenic response. Understanding how these components functionally interact as angiogenic stimuli or as repressors and how mechanisms of resistance arise is required for the identification of new therapeutic strategies. Achieving a durable and efficient antiangiogenic response will require approaches to simultaneously or sequentially target multiple aspects of the tumor microenvironment.
Angiogenesis occurs during development and vascular remodeling as a controlled series of events leading to neovascularization, which supports changing tissue requirements1. Blood vessels and stromal components are responsive to pro- and antiangiogenic factors that allow vascular remodeling during development, wound healing and pregnancy. However, in pathological situations such as cancer, the same angiogenic signaling pathways are induced and exploited.
Although an oncogenic event may allow tumor cells to evade surveillance or may enhance their survival, the large-scale growth of a tumor ultimately requires a blood supply2. To obtain this blood supply, tumor cells can tilt the balance toward stimulatory angiogenic factors to drive vascular growth by attracting and activating cells from within the microenvironment of the tumor. The magnitude and quality of the angiogenic response is ultimately determined by the sum of pro- and antiangiogenic signals and, more specifically, their unique activities on multiple cell types. Understanding how these various components are regulated is required for the design and development of effective antiangiogenic therapies for cancer.
Blood vessel remodeling in cancer
During embryonic development, blood vessels initially form through vasculogenesis, which involves de novo production of endothelial cells from angioblasts, which are recruited to differentiate in response to local cues3. Vasculogenesis is typically followed by classical sprouting angiogenesis, which involves the endothelial cells on preexisting vessels. A variety of angiogenic signals induce endothelial cells to adopt an activated phenotype: endothelial cells detach their junctional adhesions from their neighbors, sprout toward gradients of proangiogenic factors, proliferate to form provisional tubes, recruit perivascular cells to provide stability and maturation and, finally, remodel and prune to form a functional network1. Although tumor-associated angiogenesis has traditionally been defined as the sprouting of new vessels from preexisting vessels, it is becoming clear that the blood vessels that support tumor growth or tumor rebound from therapy-induced trauma can also originate from cells recruited from the bone marrow or can even differentiate from tumor stem cells (vascular mimicry) (Fig. 1 and Box 1).
In cancer, multiple sources and modes of vascular remodeling contribute to disease progression. Targeting one aspect of this remodeling process may produce a short-term effect, but suppressing one pathway could promote another. The redundancy and diversity by which blood vessels can remodel might account for the poor efficacy or acquired resistance often observed in antiangiogenic therapies. Improving the therapeutic response will require consideration of the signaling pathways that regulate the multiple cell types involved in the vascular component of cancer. Identification of common downstream signaling hubs could offer a new therapeutic strategy in suppressing angiogenesis and tumor progression, especially if these putative targets are selectively activated in tumor cells, stromal cells or in the bone marrow–derived cells that potentiate the angiogenic response.
The tumor microenvironment is composed of a variety of cell types that influence the angiogenic response to a tumor (Figs. 1 and 2). Once a tumor lesion exceeds a few millimeters in diameter, hypoxia and nutrient deprivation triggers an 'angiogenic switch' to allow the tumor to progress4. Tumor cells exploit their microenvironment by releasing cytokines and growth factors to activate normal, quiescent cells around them and initiate a cascade of events that quickly becomes dysregulated. For example, tumor cell–released vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) stimulates the sprouting and proliferation of endothelial cells. Although the induction of angiogenesis may initially provide the tumor with more oxygen and nutrients, the ultimate response is poor, as the continuously remodeled tumor vasculature is leaky and tortuous, causing irregular blood flow5. Sites of basal lamina exposed during vascular leak recruit and activate platelets, which, in turn, release angiogenic and permeability factors into the local environment to further escalate the local response5. Increased amounts of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) released by platelets and activated endothelial cells recruit and activate perivascular cells. Whereas perivascular coverage typically provides vascular stability and maturation, it does not lead to mature vessels with proper function, as the vessels are exposed to persistent stimulatory signals within the tumor microenvironment6.
The remodeling response is further driven by recruitment of tumor-associated fibroblasts, which aberrantly deposit extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and release stimulatory factors7,8,9. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) cleave and remodel the ECM to form fragments or to expose previously hidden epitopes that function as endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis10, for example, tumstatin or endostatin. Inflammatory cells move to this perceived wound, where they release factors that positively or negatively modulate the angiogenic response11,12 (Box 2). The observations regarding aberrant vasculature, inflammatory response, areas of necrosis and dense stroma led Harold Dvorak to describe tumors as “wounds that do not heal”13. Considering the variety of cell types and signals involved, there are many aspects of angiogenesis that can be targeted therapeutically. But identifying which steps and components of this process are the most susceptible to treatment with drugs ('drugable') is an important concern. The most effective therapies will probably involve targeting combinations of factors, as well as improving the efficiency of drug delivery to the tumor microenvironment.
Guidance molecules control cell recruitment. Similar to neuronal sprouting, vascular sprouting requires relevant cell types to migrate, elongate or retract in response to local guidance cues. As is seen in angiogenic growth factors, each signaling family involved in guidance—Notch, Semaphorins, Ephrins and Slits—is comprised of multiple ligands, for example, SLIT1, SLIT2 and SLIT3, that are recognized by one or more of its receptors, for example, ROBO1, ROBO2, ROBO3 and ROBO4. A cell expressing a certain ligand can bind to a neighboring cell expressing the appropriate receptor to drive signaling through a paracrine mechanism or can activate signaling in an autocrine manner when the same cell expresses both the ligand and the receptor. Thus, the expression profile of the various guidance molecules and their receptors on the multiple cell types involved in the angiogenic response can provide many combinations of local and directional cues that dictate how cells respond to their environment and how they interact with neighboring cells to control tip cell sprouting, perivascular cell coverage, recruitment of progenitor cells and attraction of macrophages.
In some instances, ligand-receptor binding may modulate other angiogenic pathways. For example, Slit ligands binding to the vascular-specific ROBO4 receptor can inhibit the signaling of VEGF14 and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)15 pathways. Similarly, neuropilin-1 is a co-receptor for both Semaphorin and VEGF ligands, and the state of its ligand binding can shift the balance of signaling between the respective receptors16. Semaphorin binding to the Plexin D1 receptor limits the angiogenic potential of VEGF and guides tip cell formation17. The situation can be even more complicated if there are multiple signaling pathways involved, as local VEGF expression can dictate the fate of a cell to the tip or the stalk by controlling the expression of the Plexin D1 receptor, which binds Semaphorin 3E and negatively regulates the Delta-like 4 (DLL4)-Notch signaling pathway18. Inhibition of one receptor or ligand may therefore have crossover effects on alternative signaling pathways, with opposing effects within distinct locations during the angiogenic response or both.
It is important to consider whether the readout of angiogenesis in a given assay is representative of global or local effects. Is angiogenesis enhanced or suppressed by preventing tip cell formation? What are the effects of blocking the endothelial stalk cell phenotype? It will be crucial to understand whether preventing the recruitment of perivascular cells destabilizes newly formed vessels and sensitizes them to vascular disrupting agents, as well as how suppression of one pathway affects the activity of other pathways within distinct local venues. Translating these findings into new therapeutic strategies will require an understanding of how guidance molecules and angiogenic growth factors cooperate. The balance of power between such pathways will probably vary as a function of concentration, location and time during the angiogenic process, and certain tumor cells might have developed strategies to preferentially perturb one or more of these pathways by their secretion of soluble ligands, their expression of receptors or both. Therefore, tumors may show differential sensitivity to certain antivascular therapies. Potential therapies could include targeting the key upstream factors driving these pathways or the common downstream mediators.
Integrins orchestrate tumor angiogenesis. The tumor stroma is composed of a variety of ECM components that regulate the angiogenic cascade19, and integrins are the primary cell-matrix adhesion molecules that integrate signals between the ECM and intracellular signaling pathways20. Each integrin is a heterodimer comprised of α and β subunits that combine to ligate one or several ECM proteins. In particular, αv and α5β1 integrins recognize the Arg-Gly-Asp sequence in their respective ligands: α5β1 binds fibronectin, αvβ5 binds vitronectin, and αvβ3 binds many substrates, including fibronectin, vitronectin, von Willebrand factor, tenascin, osteopontin, fibrillin, fibrinogen and thrombospondin21. Once ligation to a specific matrix protein occurs, integrin-mediated signaling typically develops as a function of crosstalk between integrins and specific activated cytokine or growth-factor receptors. These signaling mechanisms can determine whether a cell is in an appropriate microenvironment and will accordingly affect cell survival, migration and invasion. A cell in an inappropriate environment may express unligated integrin, which can actively promote apoptosis, anoikis or integrin-mediated death22,23, whereas proteolytic degradation of certain ECM proteins can produce fragments that also act as endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis by perturbing integrin function24,25. These cellular functions can be modulated by exposing cells to soluble factors, peptides or antibodies, which compete for binding with matrix ligands but do not result in full integrin activation. As such, these integrin antagonists are possible therapies for treating cancer by selectively disrupting integrin signaling on both tumor and stromal cells20.
Nearly 20 years ago, the selective expression of integrin αvβ3 on angiogenic endothelium was reported26, and cyclic peptides or function-blocking antibodies targeting this integrin were shown to successfully block angiogenesis and promote the regression of preestablished tumors in vivo27. Integrin αvβ3 expression in various tumors was also associated with increased tumor growth and metastasis in preclinical models and in the clinic28,29. For example, glioblastomas are high-grade brain tumors with strong expression of both the matrix protein vitronectin and its receptor, αvβ3 (refs. 28,30). As brain tumors are highly dependent on angiogenesis for their growth and spread, a cyclic peptide antagonist of αvβ3 causes regression of orthotopic glioblastomas in mice31. However, the growth of the same brain tumor cells injected simultaneously into the subcutis of mice was not affected by the integrin antagonist, suggesting that the brain microenvironment is a crucial determinant of brain tumor susceptibility to the inhibition of growth by integrin αvβ3 antagonists31. This important distinction raises the question of whether the efficacy of blocking αv integrin function in a glioblastoma is a function of inhibiting integrins on tumor cells, angiogenic blood vessels or both.
