Selenium is an essential micronutrient with important functions in human health and relevance to several pathophysiological conditions. The biological effects of selenium are largely mediated by selenium-containing proteins (selenoproteins) that are present in all three domains of life. Although selenoproteins represent diverse molecular pathways and biological functions, all these proteins contain at least one selenocysteine (Sec), a selenium-containing amino acid, and most serve oxidoreductase functions. Sec is cotranslationally inserted into nascent polypeptide chains in response to the UGA codon, whose normal function is to terminate translation. To decode UGA as Sec, organisms evolved the Sec insertion machinery that allows incorporation of this amino acid at specific UGA codons in a process requiring acis-acting Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) element. Although the basic mechanisms of Sec synthesis and insertion into proteins in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have been studied in great detail, the identity and functions of many selenoproteins remain largely unknown. In the last decade, there has been significant progress in characterizing selenoproteins and selenoproteomes and understanding their physiological functions. We discuss current knowledge about how these unique proteins perform their functions at the molecular level and highlight new insights into the roles that selenoproteins play in human health.
Selenium (Se) is an essential trace element in many organisms, including humans. This micronutrient supports various important cellular and organismal functions. Se deficiency has been recognized as a contributing factor to pathophysiological conditions, including heart disease (127), neuromuscular disorders (258), cancer (159), male infertility (351), and inflammation (168), as well as numerous other disorders. Se has been also implicated in mammalian development (181), immune function (292), inhibition of viral expression (19), and delaying the progression of AIDS in HIV-positive patients (40). Research on the physiological roles and health benefits of Se has made tremendous progress following the discoveries that the amino acid residue in proteins, selenocysteine (Sec), is a major form of Se in the cell and that Sec is encoded by the UGA codon. These findings suggested that proteins containing Sec, which is the 21st “naturally occurring” amino acid in the genetic code (Figure 1), were largely responsible for the health benefits of Se.
Since the initial discovery of Sec, there have been significant developments in our understanding of how Sec is synthesized and inserted into selenoproteins. In addition, the identities of selenoproteins, which constitute the human selenoproteome (there are 25 genes encoding selenoproteins in humans), have been established. This information allowed researchers to study various aspects of Se biology and selenoprotein functions. In this review, we provide a brief overview of Sec biosynthesis and selenoprotein synthesis. We further discuss recent developments that provide mechanistic insights into the physiological functions of selenoproteins and their roles in human health. The identity of selenoproteins and their distribution are also discussed from an evolutionary perspective.
It should be noted that recent advances in the Se field have not only contributed to our better understanding of how Se functions at the molecular level, but also provided intricate details on general protein translation machinery and evolution of the genetic code, and allowed prediction of catalytic cysteine residues at the genome-wide level. Further functional characterization of selenoproteins and analyses of selenoproteomes may explain the various biological and biomedical effects of Se and help identify new molecular pathways and biological processes that are dependent on selenoproteins.
Proteins containing Sec are present in all three evolutionary lines of descent: eukarya, archaea, and eubacteria, and they were also observed in viruses. Whereas the pathway for Sec biosynthesis in eubacteria has previously been established in great detail (108), for many years its biosynthesis in eukaryotes and archaea remained unknown. In fact, Sec was the last proteinogenic amino acid in eukaryotes for which biosynthesis was not resolved (372). The pathway for its biosynthesis was determined only in recent years using a combination of comparative genomic, molecular, and structural approaches (372,380). Sec is unique among other amino acids in that it is the only known amino acid in eukaryotes whose biosynthesis occurs on its own tRNA, designated Sec tRNA[Ser]Sec(134,209). tRNA[Ser]Secis initially aminoacylated with serine in a reaction catalyzed by seryl-tRNA synthetase (SerRS) to form seryl-tRNA[Ser]Sec(209,214), which provides the backbone for Sec biosynthesis.
tRNA[Ser]Sechas been described as both the key molecule (27) and central component (134) of selenoprotein biosynthesis. It was initially identified as a nonsense suppressor seryl-tRNA in mammalian and avian tissues that decoded specifically the stop codon UGA (132). The sequence of tRNA[Ser]Secrevealed several unique features that distinguished it from all other tRNAs (81,82). At 90 nucleotides, it was the longest tRNA that had been sequenced at that time and much longer than the ∼75 nucleotides in other tRNAs; and tRNA[Ser]Sechas relatively few modified bases and an exceptionally long variable arm (81,82). Two isoforms of tRNA[Ser]Secwere identified and sequenced, and both species formed phosphoseryl-tRNA[Ser]Sec(82, 130 and see below). Other novel features of tRNA[Ser]Secincluded an atypically long acceptor stem and a long D-stem that may have up to 6 base pairs (bp) instead of 3 or 4 bp found in other tRNAs (330). Eukaryotic and archaeal tRNA[Ser]Sechave a 9/4 secondary structure, wherein the acceptor stem contains 9 bp and the T stem 4 bp (139,148,330). In contrast, bacterial tRNA[Ser]Sechas a 8/5 cloverleaf form, whereas all canonical tRNAs have 7/5 secondary structures (156,157). The structures of tRNA[Ser]SecfromEscherichia coli,Mathanococcus jannaschii, andHomo sapiensare shown in clover leaf models inFigure 2.
The crystal structures of bacterial (157) and human (156) tRNA[Ser]Sechave been recently solved, which revealed unusual secondary structures and unique tertiary interactions. In addition, the crystal structure of tRNA[Ser]Secdemonstrated that the unusually long D stem containing 6 bp in this tRNA does not interact with the variable arm, resulting in an open cavity instead of the tertiary hydrophobic core (156). Two additional base pairs in the D stem of tRNA[Ser]Sechave been shown to be required for formation of enhanced secondary structure that compensates for the absence of canonical tertiary interactions (154).
The gene for tRNA[Ser]Sec, designatedTrsp, and its 5'- and 3'-flanking sequences that include the upstream regulatory elements and downstream Pol III termination signal, was initially sequenced from chickens (135) and subsequently from a variety of other eukaryotes, including a number of mammals, andXenopus,Drosophila,Caenorhabditis elegans,Taxoplasma gondii, several species ofPlasmodium(46 and references therein), and a variety of other eukaryotes (228 and references therein). With the use of a reverse transcription (RT)-PCR technique, tRNA[Ser]Secwas also sequenced fromChlamydomonas(290),Dictyostelium discoideum, andTetrahymena thermophila(46). Interestingly, tRNAs[Ser]Secare the longest tRNAs found in eukaryotes, archaea, and bacteria and vary in length from 90 to 93 nucleotides in eukaryotes (46,228) to well over 100 nucleotides in bacteria (139,228). Most of the extra nucleotides, which place these tRNAs in a class by themselves in terms of length, are found in the long extra arm.Trspis a single copy gene in all organisms examined thus far that encode the selenoprotein synthesis machinery except zebrafish which contain two copies (133). HumanTrsphas been localized on chromosome 19q13.2→q13.3 (257). Interestingly, mouseTrspmaps on chromosome 7 at the centromere proximal region sharing the conserved gene arrangements with human chromosome 19 (273) that represent an example of conserved mouse-human synteny.
There are several additional features of tRNA[Ser]Sec, which distinguish it from other tRNAs. It has a triphosphate moiety attached to its 5′-terminal guanosine nucleotide. This is due to an unusual transcription of tRNA[Ser]Sec, which begins at the first nucleotide within the coding sequence, whereas all canonical tRNAs have a 5′ leader sequence that must be processed (208). The regulation ofTrsptranscription is also novel among tRNAs.Trspexpression, unlike other tRNAs, is governed by three upstream regulatory regions, a TATA box motif at nucleotide −30, a proximal sequence element at approximately −70, and a distal sequence element at approximately −200 (see 136 and references therein). The biosynthesis of the two tRNA[Ser]Secisoforms including the modified bases have been reconstituted inXenopusoocytes (62,329). These modifications include 1-methyladenosine (m1A) at position 58, pseudouridine (Ψ) at position 55, isopentenyladenosine (i6A) at position 37, and either 5-methoxycarbonylmethyluridine (mcm5U) or 5-methoxycarbonylmethyl-2′-O-methyluridine (mcm5Um) at position 34 (82). Two of the modifications are located in the anticodon loop and may contribute to the stabilization of the codon-anticodon interaction on the ribosome. mcm5U serves as a precursor of mcm5Um, and Um34 methylation is the last step in the maturation of tRNA[Ser]Sec. The synthesis of Um34 requires the presence of other modifications and intact secondary and tertiary structures (178) and, in addition, that tRNA[Ser]Secbe aminoacylated (177). Moreover, two major tRNA[Ser]Secisoforms, each containing either mcm5U or mcm5Um at position 34, exist in mammalian cells, and their relative distribution is influenced by Se status (58,82,131). Under conditions of Se deficiency, the level of mcm5U is greater than mcm5Um, and during Se supplementation, the ratio of the two isoform is reversed. Interestingly, housekeeping selenoproteins (e.g., thioredoxin reductases TR1 and TR3) are synthesized by the mcm5U isoform, while stress-related selenoproteins (e.g., glutathione peroxidases GPx1 and GPx3, and selenoproteins MsrB1, SelT, and SelW) are synthesized by mcm5Um (44). There are also several selenoproteins, such as GPx4 and selenoprotein P, that appear to be synthesized by both isoforms (42).