The endogenous systems regulating energy balance have developed during the course of evolution, when the conservation of energy reserves and the efficient replenishment of exhausted energy stores were essential for survival and reproduction.26,27 Since evolution is a slow process and cannot foresee future developments,28 several of the mechanisms that were useful in the pre-industrialized world may no longer be optimal, but have not yet adapted to the present environment. These systems will respond to therapeutic interventions such as dieting as if the organism were challenged by starvation, and thereby reduce the therapeutic efficacy of low energy intake. After a period of dieting they will favour the rapid build-up of the lost energy reserves and thereby cause relapse and rebound.9,29 The mechanisms that helped our ancestors to cope with ‘feast and famine’ situations26 have today turned into obstacles to an efficient treatment of obesity. Furthermore, the therapeutic goals of modern medicine, namely to extend longevity and to prevent complications at a late age, are not in accordance with the goals of evolution, which aims at physical fitness and fertility at a young age.
The discovery of leptin has profoundly changed our concepts of the long-term regulation of energy balance. For the first time a factor from white adipose tissue was identified that informed the brain about the energy reserves of the body. Soon after the first publication on leptin, its receptors were identified.31 Their defective function is the pathophysiological basis for obesity in db=db mice and fa=fa rats, whereas the lack of circulating leptin causes obesity in ob=ob mice.32 It took only a little while before the corresponding defects were described in patients with severe forms of hyperphagia and obesity.33,34 This demonstrated clearly that leptin is as important in humans as in rodents and plays a central role in the regulation of appetite. Several recent reviews describe the actions of leptin in physiology and pathophysiology in much detail.35 – 37 Briefly, leptin is a cytokine-like molecule with a molecular mass of 16 kDa synthesized mainly, but not exclusively, in white adipose tissue. Its synthesis occurs in proportion to adipose cell size and number, but also in response to acute stimuli. It is released into the blood and reaches its receptors in the brain via facilitated passage across the blood – brain barrier. In the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus leptin binds to cytokine type I receptors, which signal through the JAK (janus kinase) – STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway. Activation of these receptors results in a reduction of food intake, which is mediated through various downstream mechanisms including neuropeptide Y (NPY) and a-melanocyte stimulating hormone (a-MSH).35 – 37 Although leptin fulfilled all criteria for an adiposity signal,14 it soon became apparent that it is not only an appetite suppressant. Numerous other actions of leptin have been described, such as effects on the endocrine system and on reproduction.38,39 These actions link the regulation of energy balance to fertility and have probably been of importance in the context of evolution. It is possible that the main message leptin conveyed to the brain was that energy stores were sufficiently large to ensure reproductive success. Conversely, falling plasma leptin levels during periods of decreasing body fat stores would have signalled to the brain to conserve energy and withhold reproductive function.40 Other actions of leptin could also relate regulatory functions to energy reserves. The impaired immune response during starvation might at least in part be the result of low leptin plasma concentrations.41 It is unclear how the effects of leptin on angiogenesis42,43 or on steatosis of muscle and liver44,45 fit into whole body regulation. Taken together, these diverse effects support the notion that leptin acts as a starvation hormone to adjust important physiological processes to body fat mass rather than as a satiety hormone to prevent extensive accumulation of body fat mass.36 Such considerations help to explain the disappointing results reported in the first trial of leptin in obese patients.46 In these studies leptin was administered daily for 24 weeks at different doses in humans. Only the highest dose, which increased plasma leptin approximately 20-fold above basal levels, resulted in a decrease of mean body weight, but even after this dose the response was highly variable. This is in contrast to the positive effects of leptin replacement treatment in a patient with leptin deficiency. In this case, the restoration of plasma leptin to normal values was sufficient to induce a progressive reduction in body weight over a 1 y treatment period.47 Recently it was reported that patients with partial leptin deficiency had an increased body fat mass.48 This suggests that a relatively small drop in plasma leptin below normal values is sensed by the systems that control energy balance. Hence it is likely that, in this subgroup of patients, treatment with leptin would also be effective.48 These observations indicate that increases in plasma leptin are much more effective in the low than in the high concentration range (Figure 3). This is also consistent with the notion that the body is better protected against weight loss than against weight gain.26 Conversely, the limited efficacy of leptin in obese patients could be due to the development of leptin resistance after prolonged exposure to increased plasma leptin concentrations.13 Such a phenomenon would also explain why the high plasma leptin levels in obese subjects49 obviously do not induce an appropriate reduction in appetite. Leptin resistance could be caused by various mechanisms such as a restricted access of leptin to its hypothalamic sites of action or an impaired intracellular signal transduction. It has indeed been shown that leptin enters the brain by a saturable mechanism.50 It has also been demonstrated that prolonged stimulation of the JAK – STAT pathway activates inhibitory components such as suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 (SOCS-3), which limit the response to agonists.51 Chronic administration of a high-fat diet to rats resulted in both a reduced uptake of leptin into the brain and a decreased response of the STAT pathway in central neurones.52 While the explanation for the limited efficacy of high plasma levels of leptin in the pathophysiology or therapy is still open, additional information was obtained from experimental and clinical studies with axokine, a derivative of ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF).53 The appetite suppressing and weight-reducing effect of axokine was incidentally detected when this cytokine was investigated as a possible treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Moreover, it was reported that after termination of treatment with axokine in rodents no rebound weight gain, which is usually seen after treatment with conventional anti-obesity drugs, was observed.53 These results are particularly interesting because axokine binds to a different receptor but probably acts through the same intracellular signalling pathway as leptin. Apparently the therapeutic effects of axokine were neither affected by limited access to its hypothalamic sites of action nor by inhibition of intracellular signalling. It would be interesting to find out why a modified cytokine, which has no apparent physiologic function in the regulation of appetite, shows a more promising therapeutic response than the endogenous ligand leptin, which is known to play a central role in the physiology and pathophysiology of energy balance.
Activation of leptin receptors in the arcuate nucleus initiates a cascade of downstream events. These include the inhibition of neurones containing NPY, an orexigenic peptide, and the stimulation of neurones containing pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), the precursor of a-MSH, an anorexigenic peptide13,14 (Figure 4).
NPY is a potent and effective orexigenic agent upon acute and chronic administration.55,56 Continuous intracerebroventricular infusion of NPY for 7 days in rats produced an obesity syndrome with typical endocrine and metabolic abnormalities.57 Early results with antisense oligonucleotides against NPY or NPY receptors suggested an important role of endogenous NPY on basal and starvation-induced food intake.58 However, the receptor subtype which mediates the orexigenic effects of NPY is still not known. For a long time the Y1 receptor or a so-called atypical, Y1- related receptor was implicated in the control of feeding.55 When a new NPY receptor, the Y5 subtype, was described, it appeared to fulfil the pharmacological criteria for being the food-intake receptor.59,60 Experiments with antisense oligonucleotides61 – 63 and an antagonist of this receptor subtype64 looked promising. However, other authors reported no effects with their Y5-receptor blockers,65 or suggested that the compound used in earlier studies64 may have nonspecific effects.66 Recent reports appear to again provide evidence for an important role of Y1 receptors in the regulation of feeding.67 It is therefore still unclear which receptor subtype is the most promising target for therapeutically active NPY antagonists.68 NPY gene knock-out in lean mice did not produce an abnormal phenotype.69 Whereas NPY gene knock-out in ob=ob mice resulted in a reduction in body weight, all combinations of other obesity models with NPY gene knockout had no effect.70 Moreover, knocking out the genes encoding for NPY receptor subtypes Y1 or Y5 did not result in hypophagia but rather in late-onset mild obesity.71,72 Taken together, the previous notion that endogenous NPY plays a dominant role in the regulation of food intake is not supported by experimental data. It cannot be excluded that the lack of a phenotype after the loss of NPY is due to redundant control systems or efficient compensatory mechanisms. However, such an explanation is unlikely because the genetic ablation of other hormones or precursors such as a-MSH or POMC does result in persistent functional defects.23 a-MSH is a posttranslational processing product of POMC and acts at various melanocortin receptor (MC-R) subtypes.73,74 In the hair follicles of the skin, a-MSH acts on the MC1-R subtype to increase melanin production, which results in a dark fur colour. An endogenous inhibitor, the so-called agouti protein, blocks the binding of a-MSH to the MC1-R and thereby modulates the effects of the hormone.75 In the hypothalamus, a-MSH acts on MC3-R and MC4-R subtypes resulting in decreased appetite and, in the long-term, in reduced body weight. At this site another endogenous inhibitor, named agouti-related protein (AGRP), modulates the effects of a-MSH by inhibiting its binding to the receptors.73,74 In genetically obese agoutiy mice a single gene defect leads to the concomitant overexpression of agouti protein in the skin and in the hypothalamus. The resulting persistent inhibition of a-MSH at both sites explains the combined phenotype of yellow fur colour and increased body fat mass.