The molecular bases underlying the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases are gradually being disclosed. One problem that investigators face is distinguishing primary from secondary events. Rare, inherited mutations causing familial forms of these disorders have provided important insights into the molecular networks implicated in disease pathogenesis. Increasing evidence indicates that accumulation of aberrant or misfolded proteins, protofibril formation, ubiquitin-proteasome system dysfunction, excitotoxic insult, oxidative and nitrosative stress, mitochondrial injury, synaptic failure, altered metal homeostasis and failure of axonal and dendritic transport represent unifying events in many slowly progressive neurodegenerative disorders. Evidence is accumulating to suggest that such chronic neurodegenerative disorders as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are caused by a combination of events that impair normal neuronal function. Clinical signs are evident before frank neuronal loss. Therefore, new efforts have focused on identifying crucial changes, of genetic, epigenetic, or environmental origin, that hamper normal neuronal function.
In this review, we summarize the current understanding of molecular pathways implicated in common neurodegenerative disorders, trying to clarify similarities that might provide a foundation for their treatment. AD is the most common neurodegenerative disorder worldwide. Approximately 4.5 million people suffer from this devastating condition in the United States alone. In AD, neurons of the hippocampus and cerebral cortex are selectively lost. Brains of individuals with AD manifest two characteristic lesions: extracellular amyloid (or senile) plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau protein (Fig. 1a)1. Amyloid plaques contain small, toxic cleavage products (denoted as Aβ40 and Aβ42) of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). The apoE4 (apolipoprotein E4) genotype is a powerful risk factor for developing AD, and it may possibly affect Aβ deposition and neurofibrillary tangle formation2. Mutations in three genes that are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion have been linked to rare familial, early-onset forms of AD. These genes include those encoding APP, presenilin 1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 (PS2). Although these familiar forms account for only a few cases of AD, one common event in both familial and sporadic types of AD is the increased production and accumulation of the toxic Aβ. This observation led to the 'amyloid cascade hypothesis' that excessive Aβ production is the primary cause of the disease3,4. Do plaques and tangles cause AD, or are they simply the telltale remains of earlier, pivotal events that led to the disease? One problem has been that in people with AD the density of amyloid plaques correlates poorly with the severity of dementia3. Furthermore, although neurofibrillary tangles correlate well with decline in cognitive skills, they seem to be a late event and in some cases possibly downstream of Aβ accumulation5. Recent findings, however, indicate that dendritic and synaptic injury occur early and that protofibrils and oligomers of Aβ40 and Aβ42, rather than large plaques, cause neuronal dysfunction. APP is a type I membrane protein and contains a large extracellular region, a transmembrane helix and a short cytoplasmic tail (Fig. 1b). The N-terminal half of APP contains a heparin-binding domain (N-APP), a copper-binding domain (CuBD) and an APP protease inhibitor domain (APPI) (Fig. 1b). The N-APP structure reveals that APP may belong to a superfamily of cysteine-rich growth factors with a putative heparin-binding site6. The CuBD structure is homologous to copper chaperones. This domain may regulate dimerization or proteolytic processing, or it may act as a metallotransporter7. There is also structural information on the Aβ peptides that originate by proteolytic processing of APP8,9. Both Aβ40 and Aβ42 adopt variable and partly helical structures dependent on membrane binding, metal chelation and interaction with other peptides. Aβ binds Cu2+, Fe2+ and Zn2+ coordinated by three histidines (His677, His684, His685) and a tyrosine (Tyr681). Metal binding induces a β-sheet-like conformational change in Aβ, resulting in enhanced aggregation. Mutations in three genes that are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion have been linked to rare familial, early-onset forms of AD. These genes include those encoding APP, presenilin 1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 (PS2). Although these familiar forms account for only a few cases of AD, one common event in both familial and sporadic types of AD is the increased production and accumulation of the toxic Aβ. This observation led to the 'amyloid cascade hypothesis' that excessive Aβ production is the primary cause of the disease3,4.
Do plaques and tangles cause AD, or are they simply the telltale remains of earlier, pivotal events that led to the disease? One problem has been that in people with AD the density of amyloid plaques correlates poorly with the severity of dementia3. Furthermore, although neurofibrillary tangles correlate well with decline in cognitive skills, they seem to be a late event and in some cases possibly downstream of Aβ accumulation5. Recent findings, however, indicate that dendritic and synaptic injury occur early and that protofibrils and oligomers of Aβ40 and Aβ42, rather than large plaques, cause neuronal dysfunction.
APP is a type I membrane protein and contains a large extracellular region, a transmembrane helix and a short cytoplasmic tail (Fig. 1b). The N-terminal half of APP contains a heparin-binding domain (N-APP), a copper-binding domain (CuBD) and an APP protease inhibitor domain (APPI) (Fig. 1b). The N-APP structure reveals that APP may belong to a superfamily of cysteine-rich growth factors with a putative heparin-binding site6. The CuBD structure is homologous to copper chaperones. This domain may regulate dimerization or proteolytic processing, or it may act as a metallotransporter7. There is also structural information on the Aβ peptides that originate by proteolytic processing of APP8,9. Both Aβ40 and Aβ42 adopt variable and partly helical structures dependent on membrane binding, metal chelation and interaction with other peptides. Aβ binds Cu2+, Fe2+ and Zn2+ coordinated by three histidines (His677, His684, His685) and a tyrosine (Tyr681). Metal binding induces a β-sheet-like conformational change in Aβ, resulting in enhanced aggregation. Toxic Aβ originates from regulated intramembrane proteolysis of APP by a complex of secretases (Fig. 1c). The first cleavage of APP is mediated by β- or α-secretase, releasing most of the extracellular portion of APP as two fragments, APPs-α and APPs-β, leaving behind the C-terminal membrane bound fragment (Fig. 1c). This portion of APP is then cleaved by a large protein complex, γ-secretase, at several sites including amino acid (aa) 711 (Aβ40) and at least three additional subsites at aa713 (Aβ42), aa714 (Aβ43) and aa720 (Aβ49) (Fig. 1b). Several mutations in APP, such as the Swedish mutation, cluster at the β-secretase cleavage sites; these mutations result in increased amounts of Aβ peptide and protofibril formation10. The precise composition of the γ-secretase complex is still under debate, but PS1, nicastrin, Aph-1 and Pen-2 seem to be required11,12,13. PS1 is a transmembrane domain aspartyl protease that cleaves its substrates in the membrane-spanning region. PS1 is probably responsible for the generation of Aβ fragments. More than 100 missense mutations in PS1 and PS2 have been identified in rare familial, early-onset AD14. Experiments in culture and transgenic mice reveal that these mutations result in increased Aβ production15,16. Conversely, mice lacking PS1 have decreased Aβ40 and Aβ42 production17,18, suggesting that PS1 has a pivotal role in γ-secretase activity. C-terminal cleavage of APP by caspase enzymes may also be required for toxicity19. It is still unclear how Aβ does its damage, but several mechanisms have been proposed. One view suggests that Aβ protofibrils activate microglia, inciting an inflammatory response and release of neurotoxic cytokines. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) including ibuprofen seem to delay the onset of AD20. Additionally, NSAIDs reduce the production of Aβ42 (ref. 21). In a second view, Aβ protofibrils trigger excessive release of excitatory amino acids like glutamate from glial cells that may injure nearby neurons by excitotoxicity. Overactivation of glutamate receptors of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype results in increased intracellular Ca2+, which activates neuronal nitric oxide synthase and consequently generates nitric oxide (NO). When generated in excess, NO combines with superoxide anion (O2−), forming the highly reactive and neurotoxic product peroxynitrite (ONOO−), which leads to further oxidative and nitrosative stress in part via mitochondrial injury. In fact, positive phase III human trials of the uncompetitive NMDA receptor channel blocker, memantine, led to its recent approval for the treatment of AD22. A third view suggests that protofibrils and aggregates convey harmful effects to neurons by paralyzing axonal and dendritic transport. Both APP and PS may bind kinesin I and regulate vesicular traffic23,24,25. PS mutants increase glycogen synthase kinase-3β activity, which hampers kinesin-mediated, anterograde axonal transport25. Also, Aβ deposits may act as nonspecific 'roadblocks', representing a physical transport barrier. An additional mechanism of Aβ injury is synaptic dysfunction and loss, which are early events in AD and occur before amyloid plaque formation26. Cholinergic transmission and synaptic density are considerably decreased in AD patients. The mechanism for synaptic damage is unknown, but diffusible oligomeric forms of Aβ may be important. Synaptic dysfunction probably contributes to memory loss and cognitive deficits in AD. In fact, APP transgenic mice manifest cellular, biochemical and electrophysiological evidence of synaptic deficits before Aβ deposition, including reduced excitatory postsynaptic potentials and LONG-TERM POTENTIATION (LTP), regarded as a correlate of learning and memory27. Inhibition of γ-secretase decreases oligomeric Aβ and LTP deficits28. Microinjection of Aβ43 and Aβ40 peptides into the rat hippocampus disrupts synaptic transmission and short-term memory29. Aβ may also mediate harmful effects by binding redox-reactive metals, which in turn release free radicals30,31,32,33,34,35,36. We found that nitrosative stress mobilizes zinc from intracellular stores, resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction37. Chelation of zinc and copper provides neuroprotective effects38. For example, clioquinol (CQ), an antibiotic that also chelates zinc and copper and crosses the blood-brain barrier, decreases brain Aβ deposition and improves learning in mutant APP transgenic mice39. A recent human phase II clinical trial of CQ for AD seems promising40. Oxidative stress from mitochondrial dysfunction occurs early in AD, and Aβ may directly or indirectly injure mitochondria41,42. Aβ blocks respiratory complex I, thus producing a decline in ATP43. In isolated mitochondria, Aβ inhibits respiration and enzyme activity (α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and pyruvate dehydrogenase)44. The mechanism of Aβ translocation to mitochondria remains unknown. New data describe an interaction partner of Aβ in mitochondria, termed Aβ-binding alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD)45. ABAD is upregulated in neurons of AD patients. Expression of ABAD in concert with mutant APP enhances free-radical production and toxicity. Conversely, a peptide that blocks Aβ-ABAD interaction prevents free-radical formation and cell death. Aβ interacts with the LD loop of ABAD, close to its nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) binding site, and may therefore induce a conformational change that prevents NAD binding. To date, however, details of the interaction are not apparent in the crystal structure45. In summary, mitochondrial dysfunction and resulting energy deficits may contribute to impaired clearance of protein aggregates and neuronal dysfunction, affecting ion channel and pump activity, neurotransmission, and axonal and dendritic transport.
